New cranky tutorial (#41)
canonical/kernel-docs: docs/tutorial/crank-your-first-kernel.md

For the scope of this tutorial, we will use a particular version of cranky. Run the following commands to get it:

:::{WARNING}
If your kteam-tools tree isn't clean, be sure to save your work before running the commands. 
They will modify the repository!
Git should warn you if any destructive actions might occur.
:::

```bash
cd ~/canonical/kteam-tools/
git pull
git checkout cranky-tutorial
```
<!--TODO checkout a `cranky-tutorial` git tag instead to ensure it's the same-->

After `checkout`, you should see output similar similar to this:

:::{terminal}
    :input: git checkout cranky-tutorial
    :dir: ~/canonical/kteam-tools/
    :user: user
    :host: host
Note: switching to 'cranky-tutorial'.

...

HEAD is now at de4674e4 mainline-build/cod-update-virgin: Split script and update freedesktop repos
:::

## 2. Download Current Version of the Kernel
Next, clone the chosen kernel in its current state.

<!-- TODO is the cd required? Or does cranky checkout default to this dir? -->
<!-- TODO this probably needs SRU cycles specified so it's more reproducible. -->
```bash
cd ~/canonical/kernel/ubuntu/

> cranky checkout noble:linux-gke

Author: I don't think you actually have to be in this dir to run the checkout command.

```bash
cd ~/canonical/kernel/ubuntu/noble/linux-gke/linux-main/
cranky fix
```
You should see some output showing that cranky executed several scripts.
You see observe cranky going through the updating process for various scripts in the output terminal.

### Rebase on top of updated parent

As `linux-gke` is a derivative kernel, we need to apply updates from its parent, the generic kernel:

```bash
cranky rebase
```

<!-- FEEDBACK: is it likely for someone going through this step to encounter rebase failures? -->

```{tip}
For non-derivative kernels (e.g., `noble:linux`), this step is not required.
```

### Fix helper scripts (again)

Sometimes after a `cranky rebase`, the helper scripts get updated. It's good practice to always re-run:

```bash
cranky fix
```

<!-- TODO what should this section be called? -->
## Commit and review updates

Now that we've pulled in all the upstream changes, we are ready to review and apply the commits to the `linux-gke` kernel.

### Add starting commit

<!-- TODO this section doesn't really explain why we are doing these things. Learn what's going on and then document better. -->

> <!-- FEEDBACK: we need minimal explanation for a tutorial. But if anything more is needed it can be added into a 'reference' for cranky which would be more detailed. And would the --help output from cranky be useful to help document this step? -->

Author: Sounds good, I'll keep it short and sweet. Yes, `--help` generally gives more info, although I haven't personally audited each help message for the subcommands, so their usefulness may vary.

# Tutorial: Crank your first kernel

Cranking an Ubuntu kernel is the process of applying patches and updates to an existing Ubuntu kernel, packaging it, and preparing it for testing.
All this is done using the [cranky](https://kernel.ubuntu.com/gitea/kernel/kteam-tools/src/branch/master/cranky) toolchain.

<!-- TODO specify the SRU cycle -->
In this tutorial, we will crank a 24.04 LTS (Noble Numbat) (codename `noble`) Google cloud kernel (codename `linux-gke`).

```{tip}
 Keep these codenames handy for future commands.
```

## Prerequisites

You will need to complete the prerequisite setup below before proceeding with the tutorial:

- {doc}`Set up your cranky environment </how-to/cranking/set-up-cranky-environment>`
- Set up your [VPN connection]

> - Get access to [Kernel team build resources]

Reviewer: The linkcheck builder is not really robust; we encounter issues for anchors all over the place.
I've added a linkcheck_ignore for anchors for kteam-docs URL.

Use `git show <commit-hash>` to view the changes.

```{terminal}
:input: cranky review-master-changes
:user: kernel-engineer
:host: ubuntu-machine
:dir: ~/canonical/kernel/ubuntu/noble/linux-gke/linux-main

Listing changes in "debian.master/" since 9f8080a647a9e2c8c9a52b3e471b3f22d4dc0c67...

851f47333771 UBUNTU: [Packaging] debian.master/dkms-versions -- update from kernel-versions (main/2025.01.13)
41b4e628ce36 UBUNTU: Upstream stable to v6.6.55, v6.10.14
1de0f53d2545 UBUNTU: [Config] updateconfigs for MICROSOFT_MANA
547230d18843 UBUNTU: [Config] updateconfigs for deprecated CONFIG_Z3FOLD
1b64b00b69b7 UBUNTU: [Config] updateconfigs to set ILLEGAL_POINTER_VALUE for riscv64
14549d19d4b5 UBUNTU: [Config] updateconfigs to select PROC_MEM_ALWAYS_FORCE
3eb67a5e5da8 UBUNTU: [Packaging] Add list of used source files to buildinfo package
3b9e978a6cb4 UBUNTU: [Packaging] Sort build dependencies alphabetically
18d768dbc001 UBUNTU: Upstream stable to v6.6.54, v6.10.13
0861dae772cb UBUNTU: [Config] update configs for CONFIG_CRYPTO_AES_GCM_P10
82fbe5ae5484 UBUNTU: Upstream stable to v6.6.53, v6.10.12
```
<!-- TODO add a link to a reference on more info about when commits should be added -->

> For the purposes of this tutorial, no additional commits need to be added.

Reviewer 2: The old tutorial included how to make additional commits, which is still useful for new starters; https://canonical-kteam-docs.readthedocs-hosted.com/en/latest/tutorial/cranky_tutorial.html#change-a-config-that-differs-from-master  

They're pretty basic git steps but it is useful to know when the additional commits are applied, and how, in the whole cranking process. Is it worth including these extra steps here in the new tutorial?

Author: Thanks, @stewarthore. Since this is a tutorial and not a how-to, we want to include (sort of) the least amount of extraneous information possible. The goal is to get you to crank one specific kernel on one specific SRU cycle, (preferably one where we don't need to apply additional commits, that's a WIP). We don't intend on adding any "generic" info about cranking steps, because that is better suited in a how-to guide/reference/explanation. 

@AnneCYH what do you think?

Reviewer 2: @benjamin051000 agreed and thanks for clarifying.  Anne also explained the intent of a tutorial vs. a how-to yesterday in the doco catch up meeting.

### Cloud Builder 

Connect to the canonical VPN. Then, run:

```bash
git remote add cbd cbd.kernel:noble.git
git push cbd
```

The output will initially look like this:
```
Total 0 (delta 0), reused 0 (delta 0), pack-reused 0
remote: *** kernel-cbd *********************************************************
remote: * Queueing builds (your 'cranky/master-next'); ok to interrupt
remote: * For results:  ssh cbd ls benjaminwheeler-noble-6c9a5055b22f-szkb
```

At this point you can interrupt the command with Ctrl-C and periodically check the build status with the ssh command it printed.

When running it, you'll see a few files either called `BUILDING` or `BUILD-OK`.

Once all the arches have `BUILD-OK`, we know the kernel built successfully.

<!-- TODO ask others about alternatives to CBD/kathleen. Those are for canonicalers only. Is it possible/easy to test in a way that anyone can do? -->

## Package the kernel for release
Run the following command:
<!--TODO add note that it's "dependents", not "dependent". -->
```bash
cranky update-dependents
```

### Tag commit
```bash
cranky tags
```
<!-- TODO describe output -->

### Verify preparation
```bash
cranky verify-release-ready
```

> The `tag pushed: warning` is an expected warning if you do not have commit rights.

Reviewer 2: On this step I am getting the following error: `no "Miscellaneous" entries: fail`. 

This means there's a commit missing a BugLink reference but because there were no additional commits in this workflow I am not sure if this expected and just coming from the changes brought in from generic. If it is expected with this tutorial worth noting here. 

For reference here's a note in the old tutorial calling out this specific entry:

https://canonical-kteam-docs.readthedocs-hosted.com/en/latest/tutorial/cranky_tutorial.html#close-the-changelog-cranky-close
```
[about half way through section]

..is the step that will show us if we have properly tagged our commits with the “BugLink” tag (which is omitted for CVE updates) and will show up in the changelog with the BugLink title associated with the commit. Otherwise it will show up as “Miscellaneous changes” which is something we want to avoid.
```

Author: I don't see that anymore:
```
❯ cranky verify-release-ready
linux-main:
                                           is valid git repo: pass
                                             release (noble): pass
                                         package (linux-gke): pass
                                     version (6.8.0-1018.22): pass
                                             ABI bump (1018): pass
                                           build number (22): pass
                                      closing release commit: pass
                      correct tag (Ubuntu-gke-6.8.0-1018.22): pass
Enter passphrase for key '/home/benjamin/.ssh/id_ed25519': 
                                                  tag pushed: pass
                                                  tag signed: pass
                conformant release tracking bug line 2093677: pass
                                        release tracking bug: pass
                                 unique release tracking bug: fail
                                  no "Miscellaneous" entries: pass
                                        No tracker bug found: warning
                                   changelog commits subject: pass
                                        final commit content: pass
linux-meta:
                                           is valid git repo: pass
                                           build number (22): pass
                                      closing release commit: pass
                      correct tag (Ubuntu-gke-6.8.0-1018.22): pass
Enter passphrase for key '/home/benjamin/.ssh/id_ed25519': 
                                                  tag pushed: pass
                                                  tag signed: pass
                                        final commit content: pass
linux-signed:
                                           is valid git repo: pass
                                           build number (22): pass
                                      closing release commit: pass
                      correct tag (Ubuntu-gke-6.8.0-1018.22): pass
Enter passphrase for key '/home/benjamin/.ssh/id_ed25519': 
                                                  tag pushed: pass
                                                  tag signed: pass
                                        final commit content: pass
ERROR: Command failed: verify-release-ready (args=[])

```

In this tutorial, we will crank a 24.04 LTS (Noble Numbat) (codename `noble`) Google cloud kernel (codename `linux-gke`). Keep these codenames in mind for future commands.

## Set up and update build environment

<!-- TODO add cranky setup how-to -->
You will need to complete the setup according to the {doc}`cranky environment setup </how-to/cranking/set-up-cranky-environment>` guide before continuing.

### Update chroot environment

We use [chroot](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chroot) environments to isolate different sets of tools when doing kernel cranking. `cranky` helps us set up and manage these chroot jails.

<!-- FEEDBACK: it isn't obvious which part is specific to the "first time setup". Meaning if this is NOT the first time you're working on it, does it mean you skip this particular create-base step or skip the whole section? Maybe add "if not, skip create-base step", along those lines. -->
If this is your first time creating a chroot for the Noble Numbat release, you must first create the chroot base:

<!-- FEEDBACK: It seems like you MUST run this command from the ~ directory? If yes i guess it should be mentioned somewhere -->
```bash

> cranky chroot create-base noble:linux-gke

Reviewer: This is a bit messy. I had to delete the chroot environments in /var/llib/schroot/* and destroy-sessions accordingly to get things to work.

But this is just for reference; it shouldn't be part of the tutorial.

Author: Yeah, sometimes the chroot creation process has issues, and from what I can tell, no one is sure how to definitively solve them. If `noble` has too many issues, I wonder if using something like `jammy` would be more stable since it's more mature.

diff --git a/debian.gke/changelog b/debian.gke/changelog
index ba1191ce3bc2..a9ccd0b375a6 100644
--- a/debian.gke/changelog
+++ b/debian.gke/changelog
@@ -1,10 +1,18 @@
-linux-gke (6.8.0-1017.21) UNRELEASED; urgency=medium
+linux-gke (6.8.0-1017.21) noble; urgency=medium
 
-  CHANGELOG: Do not edit directly. Autogenerated at release.
-  CHANGELOG: Use the printchanges target to see the curent changes.
-  CHANGELOG: Use the insertchanges target to create the final log.
+  * noble/linux-gke: 6.8.0-1017.21 -proposed tracker (LP: #2093494)
 
- -- Benjamin Wheeler <benjamin.wheeler@canonical.com>  Wed, 15 Jan 2025 12:04:33 -0500
+  [ Ubuntu: 6.8.0-52.53 ]
+
+  * noble/linux: 6.8.0-52.53 -proposed tracker (LP: #2093521)
+  * CVE-2024-53164
+    - net: sched: fix ordering of qlen adjustment
+  * CVE-2024-53141
+    - netfilter: ipset: add missing range check in bitmap_ip_uadt
+  * CVE-2024-53103
+    - hv_sock: Initializing vsk->trans to NULL to prevent a dangling pointer
+
+ -- Benjamin Wheeler <benjamin.wheeler@canonical.com>  Wed, 15 Jan 2025 12:42:30 -0500
 
 linux-gke (6.8.0-1016.20) noble; urgency=medium
```

## 5. Verify the Kernel Builds Successfully

> At this point, the kernel is built and packaged. We should test that it builds successfully.

Reviewer: I don't think this is accurate.
https://canonical-kteam-docs.readthedocs-hosted.com/en/latest/tutorial/cranky_tutorial.html#build-test-with-cbd

At least according to the existing tutorial. It's just "ready to build".

<!-- TODO verify above statement! -->
### Cloud Builder 
<!-- TODO WARNING: cbd is internal only (?) What should we put here instead? -->

> Connect to the canonical VPN. Then, run:

Reviewer: Yes! This is needed. These should be prerequisites. I am stuck here right now :D

# Tutorial: Crank your first kernel

Cranking an Ubuntu kernel is the process of applying patches and updates to an existing Ubuntu kernel, packaging it, and preparing it for testing. All this done using the [cranky](https://kernel.ubuntu.com/gitea/kernel/kteam-tools/src/branch/master/cranky) toolchain.

<!-- TODO specify the SRU cycle -->
In this tutorial, we will crank a 24.04 LTS (Noble Numbat) (codename `noble`) Google cloud kernel (codename `linux-gke`). Keep these codenames in mind for future commands.

## Set up and update build environment

<!-- TODO add cranky setup how-to -->
You will need to complete the setup according to the {doc}`cranky environment setup </how-to/cranking/set-up-cranky-environment>` guide before continuing.

### Update chroot environment

We use [chroot](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chroot) environments to isolate different sets of tools when doing kernel cranking. `cranky` helps us set up and manage these chroot jails.

> <!-- FEEDBACK: it isn't obvious which part is specific to the "first time setup". Meaning if this is NOT the first time you're working on it, does it mean you skip this particular create-base step or skip the whole section? Maybe add "if not, skip create-base step", along those lines. -->

Author: Technically, you should be able to re-run it. Maybe we should just remove the condition and just say "First, run this"

If this is your first time creating a chroot for the Noble Numbat release, you must first create the chroot base:

> <!-- FEEDBACK: It seems like you MUST run this command from the ~ directory? If yes i guess it should be mentioned somewhere -->

Author: You can run this command anywhere, unless I'm mistaken. The path to the chroot is hard-coded and should not depend on your cwd.

Author: I was able to run `cd / && cranky chroot create-base noble:linux-gke` without issue,  I'll close this for now.

```bash
cranky chroot create-base noble:linux-gke
```

> This can take up to 20 minutes to complete.

Author: Meh. My laptop is old. It just finished in 5 minutes. Let's just say "several minutes" and leave it at that.

If successful, you should observe the various packages being installed and set up in the terminal output.

Next, create the chroot session:

```bash
cranky chroot create-session noble:linux-gke
```

> This step uses APT to install various packages needed for the crank and takes about two minutes to complete.

Author: several minutes

### Update kteam-tools repository

Update your local clone of `kteam-tools` to the latest commit on the `master` branch:
For the scope of this tutorial, we will use a particular version of cranky. Run the following commands to get it:

> <!-- FEEDBACK: I think maybe stick to the `master` branch. I read through the discussion on Rake and i guess it makes sense for the `master` version to always work so it can be referenced. If it breaks then it's good for the tutorial to catch it also. -->

Author: Sounds good. An option I learned is we can track which commit hash was used when running `link-tb` or something. For now, master branch is probably okay

```{warning}
If your kteam-tools tree isn't clean, be sure to save your work before running the commands. 
They will modify the repository!
Git should warn you if any destructive actions might occur.
```

```bash
cd ~/canonical/kteam-tools/
git pull
git checkout cranky-tutorial
```
<!--TODO checkout a `cranky-tutorial` git tag instead to ensure it's the same-->

After `checkout`, you should see output similar similar to this:

:::{terminal}
    :input: git checkout cranky-tutorial
    :dir: ~/canonical/kteam-tools/
    :user: user
    :host: host
Note: switching to 'cranky-tutorial'.

...

HEAD is now at de4674e4 mainline-build/cod-update-virgin: Split script and update freedesktop repos
:::

## Download current version of kernel

You're now ready to clone the `linux-gke` kernel in its current state.

<!-- TODO is the cd required? Or does cranky checkout default to this dir? -->
<!-- TODO this probably needs SRU cycles specified so it's more reproducible. -->

> <!-- FEEDBACK: I think this is missing a step as the directory shows up out of nowhere. a mkdir is needed i think for ~/canonical/kernel/ubuntu/ -->

Author: Okay, I'll double-check and add if necessary.

Author: It auto-created the directory for me. I'll remove the `cd` step because it's not required at this stage.

```bash
cd ~/canonical/kernel/ubuntu/
cranky checkout noble:linux-gke
```

> <!-- FEEDBACK: Could you restructure the sentences here similar to the previous paragraph? Which have command + expected output + expected completion time -->

Author: TODO

Once this command is finished (It took ~20 minutes to complete), you should see the following directories inside the newly-created `./noble/linux-gke/` directory:
- `linux-main`: The actual Linux kernel source.
- `linux-meta`: Stores a set of meta-packages for the kernel. See {term}`linux-meta` for more information.
- `linux-signed`: Kernel packages that are cryptographically signed to ensure their integrity and authenticity. See {term}`linux-signed` for more information.

> <!-- FEEDBACK: This is why we have glossary terms! We can link to it. -->

Author: Oh, that's awesome! I merged in your glossary. I'll figure out the best way to link to it.

## Apply updates from upstream kernel

The upstream kernel will possibly have changes that should be propagated down to this kernel.

### Fix helper scripts

Update the local (in-tree) helper scripts cranky uses to the latest version:

```bash
cd ~/canonical/kernel/ubuntu/noble/linux-gke/linux-main/
cranky fix
```
You should see some output showing that cranky executed several scripts.
You see observe cranky going through the updating process for various scripts in the output terminal.

### Rebase on top of updated parent

As `linux-gke` is a derivative kernel, we need to apply updates from its parent, the generic kernel:

```bash
cranky rebase
```

> <!-- FEEDBACK: is it likely for someone going through this step to encounter rebase failures? -->

Author: I don't _think_ so...

(This is a dry-run)
LP: #2093652 (noble/linux-gke: <version to be filled> -proposed tracker) 2025.01.13-1
Dry Run -- no changes made
```

### Update DKMS packages - `cranky update-dkms-versions`

The `debian.master/dkms-versions` file specifies dkms modules to be packaged with its kernel.
This command updates the package versions in `debian.gke/dkms-versions` to match the ones expected for the SRU cycle.

```bash
cranky update-dkms-versions
```

Since no changes are needed at this time, you should observe the following output:

```{terminal}
:input: cranky update-dkms-versions
:user: kernel-engineer
:host: ubuntu-machine
:dir: ~/canonical/kernel/ubuntu/noble/linux-gke/linux-main

[...]

debian.gke/dkms-versions: No changes from kernel-versions
```

```{tip}
In most cases, no changes are expected as the up-to-date DKMS versions should have been committed on the generic kernel and picked up by the derivative or backport on rebase. 
```

### Add closing commit - `cranky close`

We will now create one final commit before preparing a release by running:

```bash
cranky close
```

This command is a shortcut that does the following:

> <!-- FEEDBACK: changelog? specifying the file path would help -->

Reviewer: I still think this should not be part of a tutorial.
Part of a how-to; yes. Which is the "Turning the crank" doc.

Author: I agree, I'll remove/condense it

```

### Pull sources

```bash
cd ..
# CWD == ~/canonical/kernel/noble/linux-gke/

cranky pull-sources noble:linux-gke --latest
```

### Build sources
```bash
cd linux-main/
cranky build-sources
```

## Review
```bash
cd ..
# CWD == ~/canonical/kernel/noble/linux-gke/
cranky review *.changes
```

This will generate several `.debdiff` files, which show the difference between this deb package and the last one.
You should review these files in a text editor (using a command like `vim *.debdiff`) to ensure there are no unexpected changes.
However, for the sake of this tutorial, we can assume the diffs are all correct.

## Upload

<!-- TODO take note of SRU cycle earlier in the process -->

Normally, at this point a cranker with upload rights would publish the newly-cranked kernel to its PPA, which automatically kicks off boot testing.
However, without upload rights, we can request someone with rights to review our work, and publish the kernel on our behalf.

We can push the created files to a server that is accessible to the reviewer, like `kathleen`.
<!-- TODO is this canonical-only? -->

```bash
cd linux-main/
cranky push-review -s 2024.10.08 kathleen
```

## Related topics

> Learn more about Ubuntu releases and derivative kernels [here].

Reviewer: I think the rest of the cranky-related docs should be referenced.
But this is secondary and can be an improvement.

Use `git show <commit-hash>` to view the changes.

```{terminal}
:input: cranky review-master-changes
:user: kernel-engineer
:host: ubuntu-machine
:dir: ~/canonical/kernel/ubuntu/noble/linux-gke/linux-main (cranky/master-next-s2024.12.02)

Listing changes in "debian.master/" since 9f8080a647a9e2c8c9a52b3e471b3f22d4dc0c67...

f31315007228 UBUNTU: [Packaging] debian.master/dkms-versions -- update from kernel-versions (main/2025.01.13)
3a8a3b4039e7 UBUNTU: [Packaging] do not attempt to generate BTF header on armhf
59e4c08ecd84 UBUNTU: Upstream stable to v6.6.55, v6.10.14
fadfbbcc2798 UBUNTU: [Config] updateconfigs for MICROSOFT_MANA
b5bd2549a589 UBUNTU: [Config] updateconfigs for deprecated CONFIG_Z3FOLD
1878fd662392 UBUNTU: [Config] updateconfigs to set ILLEGAL_POINTER_VALUE for riscv64
267522e21042 UBUNTU: [Config] updateconfigs to select PROC_MEM_ALWAYS_FORCE
366c11c3240e UBUNTU: [Packaging] Add list of used source files to buildinfo package
6b86533cc3d1 UBUNTU: [Packaging] Sort build dependencies alphabetically
52051394e234 UBUNTU: Upstream stable to v6.6.54, v6.10.13
763dd57e5520 UBUNTU: [Config] update configs for CONFIG_CRYPTO_AES_GCM_P10

> db4045cf4e9a UBUNTU: Upstream stable to v6.6.53, v6.10.12

Author: These may or may not show up anymore...

Reviewer: i think we should try to be more certain when it should / should not show up and indicate it accordingly

Author: Just reran the tutorial, and I'm still seeing this exact output.

The `debian.master/dkms-versions` file specifies dkms modules to be packaged with its kernel.
This command updates the package versions in `debian.gke/dkms-versions` to match the ones expected for the SRU cycle.

```bash
cranky update-dkms-versions
```

Since no changes are needed at this time, you should observe the following output:

```{terminal}
:input: cranky update-dkms-versions
:user: kernel-engineer
:host: ubuntu-machine
:dir: ~/canonical/kernel/ubuntu/noble/linux-gke/linux-main (cranky/master-next-s2024.12.02)

[...]

debian.gke/dkms-versions: No changes from kernel-versions
```

```{tip}
In most cases, no changes are expected as the up-to-date DKMS versions should have been committed on the generic kernel and picked up by the derivative or backport on rebase. 
```

### Add closing commit - `cranky close`

We will now create one final commit before preparing a release by running:

```bash
cranky close
```

This command, among several other things, closes the changelog, verifies changes are handled properly,
and makes a new commit signifying the cranked kernel.

Since there are config-related changes, `cranky close` is expected fail at this point.

> You should observe a similar error in the terminal output stating that there were changes in `debian.gke/config/annotations`.

Author: This may not be true anymore. We need to rerun now that the cycle is completely finished and see. If `cranky close` works fine, then the next section will not apply.

Reviewer: did you manage to check this @benjamin051000 ?

Author: Just did, the tutorial matched my experience, so no change necessary.

```{code-block}
:emphasize-lines: 4

Total 0 (delta 0), reused 0 (delta 0), pack-reused 0
remote: *** kernel-cbd *********************************************************
remote: * Queueing builds (your 'cranky/master-next'); ok to interrupt
remote: * For results:  ssh cbd ls kernelengineer-noble-6c9a5055b22f-szkb
```

At this point you can interrupt the command with {kbd}`Ctrl-C` and periodically check the build status with the `ssh` command it printed. For example:

```bash
ssh cbd ls kernelengineer-noble-6c9a5055b22f-szkb
```

You should see the build progress for each architecture with either `BUILDING` or `BUILD-OK` status.

```{terminal}
:input: ssh cbd ls kernelengineer-noble-6c9a5055b22f-szkb
:user: kernel-engineer
:host: ubuntu-machine
:dir: ~/canonical/kernel/ubuntu/noble/linux-gke/linux-main (cranky/master-next-s2024.12.02)

2025-01-24 04:38:50          0 amd64/BUILDING
2025-01-24 04:38:51          0 arm64/BUILDING
```

For the `linux-gke` kernel, this shows us the builds are still in progress for the amd64 and arm64 architectures.

Once all the architectures return the `BUILD-OK` status, we know the kernel built successfully.

<!--

> ### Build kernel locally

Author: We were not able to get local builds working. Does anyone know the process for this? Neither the [Wiki page](https://wiki.ubuntu.com/Kernel/BuildYourOwnKernel) nor the [kernel docs](https://canonical-kernel-docs.readthedocs-hosted.com/en/latest/how-to/develop-customize/build-kernel/) seemed to work for us :( 

Our main issue was getting this:
```
find: 'dwarfdump': No such file or directory
```
But I couldn't figure out how to install dwarfdump, or get the build tool to recognize that it was installed. 🤷🏼‍♂️

Since we have the chroot environment set up already, we can choose to build the kernel locally.

First, install additional dependencies:

```bash
cranky chroot run -u root noble:linux-gke -- apt install -y fakeroot llvm libncurses-dev dwarves
```

Clean up any temporary build files and reset the source tree:

```bash
cranky chroot run noble:linux-gke -- fakeroot debian/rules clean
```

Then build and compile the different kernel packages:

```bash
cranky chroot run noble:linux-gke -- fakeroot debian/rules binary-headers binary-generic binary-perarch
```

If the build is successful, you should find several .deb binary package files in the directory above the build root directory.

```{terminal}
:input: ls ../
:user: kernel-engineer
:host: ubuntu-machine
:dir: ~/canonical/kernel/ubuntu/noble/linux-gke/linux-main (cranky/master-next-s2024.12.02)

TBD
```

## Package the kernel for release - `cranky update-dependents`

To update all dependent packages in this `linux-gke` tree set (e.g. `linux-meta`, `linux-signed`, `linux-lrm`), run:

```bash
cranky update-dependents
```

> If successful, you should see the "SUCCESS: update complete" message in the output.

Author: Whoops, this needs to be brought back in.

linux-meta-gke_6.8.0-1018.22_source.buildinfo
linux-meta-gke_6.8.0-1018.22_source.changes
linux-signed-gke_6.8.0-1018.22.dsc
linux-signed-gke_6.8.0-1018.22.tar.xz
linux-signed-gke_6.8.0-1018.22_source.buildinfo
linux-signed-gke_6.8.0-1018.22_source.changes
```

## Review changelog - `cranky review`

We are now ready to review all the changes and updates that have been made for your `linux-gke` kernel.

```bash
cd ~/canonical/kernel/ubuntu/noble/linux-gke/
cranky review *.changes
```

This will generate 3 {file}`*.debdiff` files, each showing the difference between the latest deb package and the previous one.
These source changes should be reviewed in a text editor (e.g. using a command like `vim *.debdiff`) to ensure there are no unexpected changes.

## Upload

Normally, at this point a cranker with upload rights would publish the newly-cranked kernel to its PPA, which automatically kicks off boot testing.
However, without upload rights, we can request someone with rights to review our work, and publish the kernel on our behalf.

To push the created files to a server that is accessible to the reviewer (e.g. like `kathleen`):

```bash
cd linux-main/

> cranky push-review -s s2024.12.02 kathleen

Reviewer: @benjamin051000 , this is the only part i'm not sure about even after looking at the cranky help output.

Theoretically if you start from a specific cycle, the intended updates should also point to the same cycle?

I wasn't sure if you used just any random cycle in your original tutorial.

Author: Correct, this should use the same cycle number as the other commands, `s2024.12.02`.

# Tutorial: Crank your first kernel

Cranking an Ubuntu kernel is the process of applying patches and updates to an existing Ubuntu kernel, packaging it, and preparing it for testing.

> All this is done using the [cranky](https://kernel.ubuntu.com/gitea/kernel/kteam-tools/src/branch/master/cranky) toolchain.

Reviewer 3: Need to update this to forgejo

> In this tutorial, we will crank a 24.04 LTS (Noble Numbat) (codename `noble`) Google cloud kernel (codename `linux-gke`) from the "s2024.12.02" cycle.

Reviewer: hey @gagath , not really sure about your comment, are you saying the grammar here should be "for" instead of "from"?

This starts our kernel at version "6.8.0-1017.21", from which we will create a new version "6.8.0-1018.22".

```{tip}

>  Keep these codenames and cycle name handy for future commands.

Reviewer: Thanks @gagath for pointing this out.

Does this change make it more straightforward?

```suggestion
Take note of the codenames and cycle name; we will need them for other commands in this tutorial.
```

Inside, there should be three git repositories cloned: `linux-main`,  `linux-meta`, and `linux-signed`.

For more information, see {term}`linux-meta` and {term}`linux-signed` in the glossary.

## Apply updates from upstream kernel

The upstream kernel will possibly have changes that should be propagated down to this kernel.

### Fix helper scripts - `cranky fix`

Update the local (in-tree) helper scripts cranky uses to the latest version:

```bash
cd ~/canonical/kernel/ubuntu/noble/linux-gke/linux-main/
cranky fix
```

You should see that cranky executed several scripts and go through the updating process for various scripts in the output terminal.

### Rebase on top of parent kernel - `cranky rebase`

As `noble:linux-gke` is a derivative kernel, we need to apply updates from its parent, `noble:linux`.

Choose a tag from the parent kernel to rebase onto, and run:

```bash
cranky rebase -b Ubuntu-6.8.0-53.55
```

```{tip}
For non-derivative kernels (e.g., `noble:linux`), this step is not required.
```

You should observe something similar in the output terminal:

```{terminal}
:input: cranky rebase -b Ubuntu-6.8.0-53.55

> :user: kernel-engineer

Author: I have an open issue about this: https://github.com/canonical/canonical-sphinx-extensions/issues/49

If we drop them, it looks kinda ugly :( I agree with you though. Maybe I'll just draft the PR over there to get the ball rolling.

> :user: kernel-engineer

Reviewer 3: I'd prefer we didn't use terminal blocks at all, they're very noisy and I have not been convinced that they're any better than plain code blocks used everywhere else.

> :user: kernel-engineer

Author: @ijwhitfield Generally the convention is to use code blocks for copyable commands, and to use terminal-output to show the result, i.e., how the output should look if you were to run the command.

I have no comments on whether or not it's something we should use, but it is the accepted style as far as I can tell. The CSS styling does make it really POP. Maybe something to consider on their repo

> :user: kernel-engineer

Reviewer 3: Seems like a solution without a problem to me (the first line of a code block could just be `$ cranky open` for example), and it means we are beholden to PR reviews on another repo in order to format docs the way we want. If the CSS styling of general purpose code blocks needs to change then that's a different problem. In my opinion there's no reason for code blocks to have a larger font than the rest of the document like they currently do, which would probably solve most of the problem of including verbose shell output in an article.

> :user: kernel-engineer

Author: @ijwhitfield see https://github.com/canonical/kernel-docs/issues/42 for my inquiry about this. 

My takeaway from that discussion is that what we have in this PR is the accepted practice. I agree that there is potential for improvement, but my goal is to make it cohesive right now with the other documentation Canonical has published.

> :user: kernel-engineer

Author: https://github.com/canonical/canonical-sphinx-extensions/pull/51 got merged, so we will remove the user and host.

:host: ubuntu-machine
:dir: ~/canonical/kernel/ubuntu/noble/linux-gke/linux-main (cranky/master-next-s2024.12.02)
:scroll:

Rebase still needed between Ubuntu-6.8.0-52.53 and Ubuntu-6.8.0-53.55.

> II: record=/home/annecyh/canonical/kernel/ubuntu/noble/linux-gke/linux-main/.git/REBASE-SELECTOR

Author: A ha! The output still shows that @AnneCYH ran this command! 😄 It's not a big deal, we can either change these, or just leave them in. 🤷🏼‍♂️ I doubt it matters much

Reviewer: lol i must have missed that
the rest are executed by "kernel-engineer" user, haha!
minor fix; i'll get it updated

Author: Note that the `:user:` and `:host:` fields are planned to be deleted.

--- a/debian.gke/changelog
+++ b/debian.gke/changelog
@@ -1,10 +1,1229 @@
-linux-gke (6.8.0-1018.22) UNRELEASED; urgency=medium
+linux-gke (6.8.0-1018.22) noble; urgency=medium
 
-  CHANGELOG: Do not edit directly. Autogenerated at release.
-  CHANGELOG: Use the printchanges target to see the curent changes.
-  CHANGELOG: Use the insertchanges target to create the final log.
+  [ Ubuntu: 6.8.0-53.55 ]
 
- -- Kernel Engineer <kernel.engineer@canonical.com>  Wed, 12 Feb 2025 12:43:08 +0800
+  * noble/linux: 6.8.0-53.55 -proposed tracker (LP: #2093677)
+  * Packaging resync (LP: #1786013)
+    - [Packaging] debian.master/dkms-versions -- update from kernel-versions
+      (main/2025.01.13)
[...]

+ -- Kernel Engineer <kernel.engineer@canonical.com>  Wed, 12 Feb 2025 13:49:40 +0800
 
 linux-gke (6.8.0-1017.21) noble; urgency=medium
```

### Verify the kernel builds successfully

Now that our local `linux-gke` kernel source tree has been updated, we should test that it builds successfully.

<!--
### Build kernel in CBD
-->
For Canonical users, we can use the cloud builder system (CBD) for this purpose.

Connect to the Canonical VPN and run:

```bash

> git remote add cbd cbd.kernel:noble.git

Reviewer: thanks for pointing this out @gagath , this is exactly the question @benjamin051000 and I had.

Do you think it is OK to mention CBD in our docs? we thought of addressing this by adding 2 parts for this - one for internal users (using CBD) and one for external users (building locally?)

> git remote add cbd cbd.kernel:noble.git

Author: We wanted to initially have information about building locally, but @AnneCYH weren't able to get it working :( 

One option is simply removing this section for now, or linking to another doc that explains various ways on how to build a kernel... 🤷🏼‍♂️

> git remote add cbd cbd.kernel:noble.git

Reviewer 3: We do have a doc in this repo that is specifically for building a kernel. We should be linking to it either way.

> git remote add cbd cbd.kernel:noble.git

Author: @AnneCYH should we link to https://canonical-kernel-docs.readthedocs-hosted.com/en/latest/how-to/develop-customize/build-kernel/ at the end of the Build section, or at the bottom of the document in the related links section?

> git remote add cbd cbd.kernel:noble.git

Reviewer: we do have but the current doc doesn't really address what is needed by this tutorial which is why we haven't been able to make it work.

> git remote add cbd cbd.kernel:noble.git

Author: Once outstanding requests have been resolved, we intend on moving this tutorial internal.

                                           build number (22): pass
                                      closing release commit: pass
                      correct tag (Ubuntu-gke-6.8.0-1018.22): pass
                                                  tag pushed: pass
                                                  tag signed: warning
                                        final commit content: pass
```

The "tag pushed: pass" status is based on the tag for this version that was previously pushed when it was cranked.
The "unique release tracking bug: fail" status is expected since we did not link a new tracking bug in this tutorial.

### Pull sources - `cranky pull-source`

The final step of preparing the package update is building the source packages that need to be uploaded.

First, we will need to pull in the changes of the previous kernel version (`6.8.0-1017.21`) that we want to base our current kernel version off of.
This is required for the main and dependent packages.

```bash
cd ~/canonical/kernel/noble/linux-gke/
cranky pull-source linux-gke '6.8.0-1017.21'
cranky pull-source linux-signed-gke '6.8.0-1017.21'

> cranky pull-source linux-meta-gke '6.8.0-1017.21'

Author: Does this require a `~/.getabis.noble-gke` file? I have one. I'll remove the file and test it.

Author: Looks like you don't need it.

Reviewer 3: Did you fallback to ~/.getabis.noble?

:user: kernel-engineer
:host: ubuntu-machine
:dir: ~/canonical/kernel/ubuntu/noble/linux-gke/linux-main (cranky/master-next-s2024.12.02)

> :scroll:

Author: Does this add the horizontal scroll? That's all I see. Was the behavior before that the words would wrap? I can't remember haha

Reviewer: lol yes it was wrapped so long lines get displayed on the next; which throws things off
not a dealbreaker but since it exists :D
